In an earlier video we learned about some
of the classic business problems that can
be solved using data analytics.
Our objective was to start shifting
our focus from analytic methods
back to the business context and
the issues that are driving our
analytic process as a whole.
We can then start thinking about all the
things we need to do after our analysis
is complete,
to drive action in a market place.
In this video we're going to spend
just a little time rounding out our
perspective by looking at some emerging
problems that have stimulated new types of
analytical methods and solutions.
Mainly areas involving the web,
mobile, and social media.
Unless you've been hiding under a rock
somewhere these technologies probably need
no introduction.
But just in case let's outline
exactly what we're talking about.
When we say the web, we're talking about
how people navigate and use the Internet.
More specifically, we're often focused
on how organizations interact with their
users or customers' via website.
With Mobile,
we consider where people are and
what they are doing by focusing in
the presence and usage of mobile devices.
Whether they be mobile phone,
tablets, laptops or
other connected devices
that can move with a user.
We can actually expand this a little to
include objects that are connected to
mobile networks.
Whether they be mobile like a car or truck
or not like the water meter at your house.
Social media speaks to
how people interact and
share information with each other
in an online connected environment.
This is actually a pretty broad concept
which incorporates a number of ideas,
as illustrated in this nice figure
from Brian Solis and JESS3.
In our discussion, we'll focus on
a couple of aspects of social.
Namely, how organizations look
at what users communicate and
how users are connected to each other.
Okay, now that we have the basics defined,
let's outline some of the business
issues associated with each area.
And how we use analytics
to address those issues.
Let's start with the web.
Just about all organizations have one or
more websites that they use to interact
with their users or customers.
One of the most common needs
that organizations have,
is to understand how users
interact with the website itself.
Questions we might want to
answer include the following.
How many users are coming to the website,
and where are they coming from?
How long do people stay on the website?
How do people navigate
through the website?
Are people getting stuck somewhere,
or is navigation fluid?
How often do users access help or
FAQ sections of the site?
How often are certain actions,
like purchasing, happening?
When do they leave the website and where
do they go when they leave the website?
Understanding these types of patterns
helps us assess whether our website is
well designed and whether we
are stimulating the right volumes and
types of activity.
For example,
let's say the we're an online retailer.
We might find the traffic to
our site is very strong and
that people spend quite
a while browsing products and
regularly add products to
their online shopping cart.
But for some reason those
products aren't being purchased.
By looking closely at exactly where
customers are falling out of the process,
we might find that a point in the
navigation path is broken or confusing.
So how do we typically get
this type of information?
It turns out that most websites have
measurement mechanisms built into
the site itself.
Usually each page or element on
a page contains a small piece of code
that generates a message when your
user arrives or clicks on something.
These messages are written to logs and
can be interpreted using a web analytic
services like those provided by Google's,
Adobe, IBM and Web Trends among others.
Or driven directly into
an organization's data environment,
we can incorporate the data from website
into a variety of descriptive productive
prescriptive analysis.
And there are a number of common web
analytics matrix that are used to
characterize behavior.
Two very common types of analysis you
might see are funnel analysis and
path analysis.
Funnel analysis traces how many customers
move from one major stage of a process
to the next.
For example, from the website
homepage to a shopping cart,
to a registration process,
to an actual purchase payment.
The visualization of this type of
analysis tends to resemble a funnel.
Hence the name.
Path analysis is a bit more involved and
quantifies the ways that customers
navigate through a website
which is usually not linear.
Here's a simple example of how path
information might be represented based
on web data.
The other major way that organizations
use the web is for online advertising.
We may want to ensure that our website
is listed prominently when people
search the web.
Or we may want to drive people to our
website from other sales channels by using
ads on third party websites.
The way we measure the activities
stimulated by online advertising is
similar to the way we
measure other web activity.
Namely through the same snippets of the
code that fire when someone clicks on our
ads or someone arrives at our web site
from specific third party locations.
However, the way we figure out where and
how to advertise involves some special
types of analysis,
including Search Engine Optimization.
Where we try to understand the algorithms
used by search engines and
set up our web site to optimize
when our web site shows up.
The web is obviously massive and complex.
And there are many more ways in which
web data can be used in analytics.
But again, these are the most common
ones you'll see in most organizations.
Let's move on mobile,
first many of the same ideas that
apply to that web also fly to mobile.
Users can access web
sites on mobile devices.
And we like to understand
that experience and
potentially how that experience differs
across different types of devices.
We can often use web analytics
techniques to get the answers.
Mobile also adds another dimension
to our advertising use case.
Companies are increasingly using available
information about a user's location
to provide highly localized targeted ads
to the right people at the right place,
at the right time.
However one of the richest areas
of insight provided by mobile data
is around how people and objects as
a whole are distributed geographically and
how they move around.
It's possible for many companies
to get access to this information.
Here is some examples.
A retailer's mobile application ask for
permission to access GPS
information on a device.
A wireless carrier detects which
cell towers connect to a device.
A fast food restaurant chain sees
when a mobile device connects
to a Wi-Fi hotspot in the store.
A trucking company installs wireless
devices in all its vehicles.
There are a wide variety of marketing,
sales,
and operations problems that can
be by understanding location data.
In fact, there are entire businesses that
are built with location data at the core.
Think of your favorite navigation or
traffic app on your phone.
There are also businesses that
are using precisely positioned
connection points within
their physical locations
to track how customers move
through a building or store.
Broadly speaking the techniques we
use when working with location data
fall into a class of analytics
called spatial analytics.
Normally this involves plotting
location points on a map of some sort.
And using visualization or
algorithms to identify patterns and
draw inferences on behaviors.
We would also use related techniques like
boundary triggering, cluster pattern
analysis, or hot spot analysis to drive
insights around specific problems.
Let's look at a simple example of how
we might use mobile location data.
To identify different patterns of
behavior and perhaps assign specific
characteristics or segments to
customers based on what we see.
Supposed we're working in
a wireless company and
we want to examine where customers tend
to use their phones for making calls.
We might use location data to
identify a few patterns like these.
In the first figure, we have a bit
of a a barbel pattern with use on
a path between two end point clusters.
This might represent someone travelling
between work and home, or school and
home locations.
In the second example we see a single
dominate use location, this could be
someone who works at home like
a homemaker or owner of a home business.
In the third example we see clusters
of use in various locations across
the United States.
This might be a consultant or
travelling sales person.
We could use classification based on these
patterns directly in business strategy or
marketing decisions.
Or we could drive these distinctions into
other analytical efforts such as broader
segmentation or
direct marketing activities.
The last emerging area we'll
cover is social media.
As we noted earlier this
is a pretty broad space.
But let's look at a couple of the most
common business problems that social media
can help to inform.
The first is helping us understand how our
organization is perceived in the market.
Analysis of the patterns and content
of comments made about our organization
can help us identify what
things are going well.
And whether there might be
issues we need to address.
This in turn can help shape strategy and
tactics in the market.
So, how do we actually do it?
Typically, we start with a tool or service
that scrapes relevant content from a set
of social media sites,
blogs or other sources.
Using this data,
we can construct simple measures,
like how many times people
refer to our organization.
And where or
when people are talking about us.
We can also employ this technique
called sediment analysis
which uses text mining to identify
words or phrases that are positive or
negative or which refer to specific
ideas or events of interest.
This type of social media analysis tends
to focus on how people relate to our
organization individually or as a whole.
However, there are some really
interesting insights that can be gained
by examining how people
interact with each other.
There's some ways this can be done
using publicly available data but
the richest insights are possible when
an organization has access to a complete
set of interaction.
Social networks themselves obviously
have access to this type of data.
But so do organizations like
telecommunications companies
who can see things like calling
patterns across all customers.
If we do have access to broad network
data, we employ methods like social
network analysis to identify
interaction patterns, groupings and
even the roles of individuals
within their own personal networks.
Let's use an example to illustrate.
Let say we're able to see how a group
of people interact with each other.
We can use the presence of interactions
to construct the following network graph
of the group.
Right away we can see what looks
like two more connected subgroups
linked by a few individuals with common
connections between those subgroups.
Now with only 11 people it's pretty
easy to see how the connections exist.
But you can imagine how difficult visual
interpretations might be with hundreds,
thousands or even millions of people.
It turns out that we can use some
numerical matrix to identify people who
occupy key positions
within a social network.
Here are a few popular measures each
of which has a specific numerical
calculations behind them.
The first is Network Centrality,
which is the number of direct
neighbors someone has in the network.
As the name suggests,
these are people who tend to sit
at the center of network clusters.
So, who do you think has the highest
degree of Network Centrality
in our network?
If you said Jane, you're correct.
With four direct neighbors, Jane has more
direct connections than anyone else.
A second measure is called
the Closeness Centrality
which is basically how close each
person is to all others in the network.
This one is a bit harder to do visually.
Can you identify a couple of people who
might be the closest to all others?
In turns out that Frank actually has
the highest level of Closeness Centrality,
just edging out Ethan.
A third measure is Betweeness Centrality,
which is a measure that identifies key
linkages between nodes of a network.
What do you think about this one?
Again, both Ethan and Frank occupy
critical positions in the network,
as they link the two nodes together.
The final measure we'll look at is
called Clustering Coefficient Centrality
which is also known as the all my
friends know each other measure.
It's the degree to which someone's direct
connections are connected to each other.
Who do you think scores
highly in our example?
Because all of Chris and
Brad's friends are also connected to
each other they have the highest degree
of Clustering Coefficient Centrality.
In fact when we have a set of people
who are all connected to each other
we called this is Clique it turns
out the Brad, Chris, Dave and
Amy form a Clique in an narrow since they
were all connected directly to each other.
So how might we use this information?
One of the things we might do is
try to identify influencers within
a social network and
engage them in some way.
Our hope is that we can ultimately reach
more people with less effort by taking
advantage of word of mouth or
other social cues that influencers
might propagate on our behalf.
We might also make sure that influencers
have great costumer experiences.
Since the impact of poor costumer
experience can likewise be amplified far
beyond one individual.
But who exactly is in influence?
It's not always the case that people at
the center of the network are the most
influential.
Usually what we need to do is a little
testing against our network to see how
messages propagate.
For example we can send information about
an offer to a set of potential influencers
then look to see who
else seeks out the offer.
This would provide information
about who the real influencers are.
Our centrality measures
help start the process
by identifying the best candidates for
a potential influencer pool.
One thing you may be noticing, is that
while all these areas, the web, mobile and
social media are relatively new in the
broad history of business and commerce.
The basic business issues associated with
them are not really all that different
than those organizations have faced for
decades.
Businesses have always needed to
understand how their sales and
communication channels are functioning.
Understanding location and
where people move have long
been a part of retail strategy.
And the impact of community and word
of mouth is as old as commerce itself.
What is different is how broad
a reach newer technologies have and
the amount of data we are able
to capture about how they work.
This opens up all sorts
of new possibilities, and
of course, opportunities for analytics.
Keep this in mind as we continue to
explore how we turn our analyses into
strategy and tactics for
action in the market.